Kenya in Africa the last two northern
white rhinos poised on the brink of
extinction
but can science save them
[Music]
for the making of his BBC seven world's
one planet series naturalist David
Attenborough travelled to the old
pajetta Conservancy to film with the
last two northern white rhinos
once widespread nogen and phatu are now
all that is left of this subspecies
which has been brutally hunted by
poachers for many decades
nearby is a memorial here gravestones
mark the deaths of some of the many
rhinos killed by poachers since 2004
that's particularly sad one max I think
I may have messes
when David made his first wildlife
documentary in the 1950s there were over
2,000 northern white rhinos in Africa
Sudan the last male northern white rhino
now only nagging and phatu survive and
to keep them safe from poachers they
must live out their days under constant
armed guard
unfortunately this rhinos are live at
threat of being poached for their horns
which has a market in the Middle East a
kilo can go with around 6500 US dollars
with no male survivors and both females
unable to carry a pregnancy many people
consider the northern white rhino to
already be extinct
you're watching their video looking at
extinction we just you know nothing much
they can do and just accept the fate
that you've allowed them to be in
[Music]
but a group of scientists believe this
need not be the final chapter in the
northern white rhinos story right now we
are here at Petra tech Conservancy
tomorrow is an one of a very important
phase of project which is going on for
more than five years using in vitro
fertilization techniques the scientists
will take eggs from the last two females
and attempt to fertilize them with
frozen sperm collected from two northern
white rhino males before their deaths
if embryos are successfully created they
could be transferred to a surrogate
mother of a difference of species
allowing a population of northern white
rhinos to be created even if the last
two females were no longer alive the
power of IVF is the multiplication
factor if we have embryos we can
multiply we can have 10 20 maybe 30
embryos a year and then place them in
southern white rhinos and then create a
new northern white rhino population in a
very very short time after years of
planning the procedure tomorrow will
determine the future of this subspecies
[Music]
yeah confidence that that we will change
the world tomorrow it's the day of the
procedure first the females are
separated the rhinos are then
tranquilized the team will have to work
fast before the unaesthetic wears off
this procedure has never been done
before new technology and ultrasound
must be used to locate the ovaries
[Music]
after four long years of preparation the
eggs have finally been collected but
this is just the beginning they must I
left them from Kenya to the laboratory
in Italy where they will be fertilized
with the frozen sperm this procedure
must happen within hours so the journey
across continents needs to go without
errors
[Music]
one month later there is good news the
team was able to harvest 10 eggs leading
to the development of two northern white
rhino embryos preparations for the right
surrogate mothers to carry these embryos
are now underway only time will tell but
there may yet be a future for the
northern white rhino I think the young
generation is much more aware what
biodiversity actually means we are
scientists think we we can have to have
wined some of this mistakes and gives
the responsibility to the young
generation
you
[Music]